content/post/2019-05-25-linear-algebra-05-vector-spaces.md, before:

---
draft: false
layout: post
title: "Linear Algebra: Vector Spaces and Subspaces"
subtitle: "Linear Algebra Crash Course for Programmers Part 5"
date: 2019-05-25
author: "Craig Johnston"
URL: "linear-algebra-vector-spaces/"
image: "/img/post/matrix.jpg"
twitter_image:  "/img/post/matrix_876_438.jpg"
tags:
- Linear Algebra
- Matrices
- Math
- Python
- Data Science
series:
- Linear Algebra Crash Course
---

This article on **vector spaces and subspaces** is part five of an ongoing crash course on programming with linear algebra, demonstrating concepts and implementations in Python. Vector spaces provide the theoretical framework for understanding linear algebra, while subspaces help us analyze the structure of matrices and linear transformations.

<!--more-->

This series began with [Linear Algebra: Vectors](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-vectors/) and has covered [Matrices](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-matrices/), [Systems of Equations](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-systems-equations/), and [Inverses and Determinants](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-inverse-determinant/).

> Python examples in this article make use of the [Numpy] library and [SciPy] for advanced linear algebra operations.

[numpy]: https://imti.co/python-data-essentials-numpy/
[SciPy]: https://scipy.org/

```python
import numpy as np
from scipy import linalg
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from mpl_toolkits.mplot3d import Axes3D

%matplotlib inline
```
{{< math >}}
{{< toc >}}
{{< content-ad >}}

## What is a Vector Space?

A **vector space** (or linear space) is a collection of vectors that can be added together and multiplied by scalars while staying within the collection. Formally, a vector space $V$ over a field $F$ (typically $\mathbb{R}$) must satisfy:

**Closure properties:**
- Addition: If $\vec{u}, \vec{v} \in V$, then $\vec{u} + \vec{v} \in V$
- Scalar multiplication: If $\vec{v} \in V$ and $c \in F$, then $c\vec{v} \in V$

**Additional axioms:**
- Associativity, commutativity of addition
- Existence of zero vector and additive inverses
- Distributivity of scalar multiplication

The most common example is $\mathbb{R}^n$, the space of all $n$-dimensional real vectors.

```python
# R^3: The space of all 3-dimensional vectors
# Any linear combination of vectors in R^3 stays in R^3

u = np.array([1, 2, 3])
v = np.array([4, 5, 6])
c = 2.5

# Closure under addition
w = u + v
print(f"u + v = {w}  (still in R^3)")

# Closure under scalar multiplication
scaled = c * u
print(f"{c} * u = {scaled}  (still in R^3)")
```

    u + v = [5 7 9]  (still in R^3)
    2.5 * u = [2.5 5.  7.5]  (still in R^3)

## Linear Independence

A set of vectors $\{\vec{v}_1, \vec{v}_2, \ldots, \vec{v}_k\}$ is **linearly independent** if the only solution to:

<p><div>
$
c_1\vec{v}_1 + c_2\vec{v}_2 + \cdots + c_k\vec{v}_k = \vec{0}
$
</div></p>

is $c_1 = c_2 = \cdots = c_k = 0$.

If there exist non-zero coefficients that satisfy this equation, the vectors are **linearly dependent**.

```python
def check_linear_independence(vectors):
    """Check if a set of vectors is linearly independent."""
    # Stack vectors as columns of a matrix
    A = np.column_stack(vectors)
    rank = np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)
    num_vectors = len(vectors)

    is_independent = (rank == num_vectors)
    return is_independent, rank

# Example 1: Linearly independent vectors
v1 = np.array([1, 0, 0])
v2 = np.array([0, 1, 0])
v3 = np.array([0, 0, 1])

independent, rank = check_linear_independence([v1, v2, v3])
print(f"Vectors: {v1}, {v2}, {v3}")
print(f"Linearly independent: {independent}, Rank: {rank}\n")
```

    Vectors: [1 0 0], [0 1 0], [0 0 1]
    Linearly independent: True, Rank: 3

```python
# Example 2: Linearly dependent vectors
w1 = np.array([1, 2, 3])
w2 = np.array([2, 4, 6])  # w2 = 2 * w1
w3 = np.array([1, 1, 1])

independent, rank = check_linear_independence([w1, w2, w3])
print(f"Vectors: {w1}, {w2}, {w3}")
print(f"Linearly independent: {independent}, Rank: {rank}")
print(f"Note: w2 = 2 * w1, so they are dependent")
```

    Vectors: [1 2 3], [2 4 6], [1 1 1]
    Linearly independent: False, Rank: 2
    Note: w2 = 2 * w1, so they are dependent

## Span

The **span** of a set of vectors is the set of all possible linear combinations of those vectors:

<p><div>
$
\text{span}(\vec{v}_1, \vec{v}_2, \ldots, \vec{v}_k) = \{c_1\vec{v}_1 + c_2\vec{v}_2 + \cdots + c_k\vec{v}_k : c_i \in \mathbb{R}\}
$
</div></p>

```python
# Visualize the span of two vectors in R^2
def plot_span_2d(v1, v2, ax, title):
    """Visualize the span of two 2D vectors."""
    # Generate random linear combinations
    t = np.linspace(-2, 2, 50)
    s = np.linspace(-2, 2, 50)
    T, S = np.meshgrid(t, s)

    # Points in the span
    X = T * v1[0] + S * v2[0]
    Y = T * v1[1] + S * v2[1]

    ax.scatter(X.flatten(), Y.flatten(), alpha=0.3, s=1, c='blue')
    ax.quiver(0, 0, v1[0], v1[1], angles='xy', scale_units='xy', scale=1,
              color='red', width=0.02, label=f'v1 = {v1}')
    ax.quiver(0, 0, v2[0], v2[1], angles='xy', scale_units='xy', scale=1,
              color='green', width=0.02, label=f'v2 = {v2}')
    ax.set_xlim(-5, 5)
    ax.set_ylim(-5, 5)
    ax.set_aspect('equal')
    ax.grid(True, alpha=0.3)
    ax.legend()
    ax.set_title(title)

fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(12, 5))

# Two independent vectors span R^2
plot_span_2d(np.array([1, 0]), np.array([0, 1]), axes[0],
             'Independent vectors: Span is all of R^2')

# Two dependent vectors span a line
plot_span_2d(np.array([1, 2]), np.array([2, 4]), axes[1],
             'Dependent vectors: Span is a line')

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Basis

A **basis** for a vector space $V$ is a set of vectors that:
1. Are linearly independent
2. Span $V$

The **dimension** of a vector space is the number of vectors in any basis.

```python
# Standard basis for R^3
e1 = np.array([1, 0, 0])
e2 = np.array([0, 1, 0])
e3 = np.array([0, 0, 1])

print("Standard basis for R^3:")
print(f"e1 = {e1}")
print(f"e2 = {e2}")
print(f"e3 = {e3}")

# Any vector in R^3 can be written as a linear combination
v = np.array([3, -2, 5])
print(f"\nVector v = {v}")
print(f"v = {v[0]}*e1 + {v[1]}*e2 + {v[2]}*e3")
print(f"Verification: {v[0]*e1 + v[1]*e2 + v[2]*e3}")
```

    Standard basis for R^3:
    e1 = [1 0 0]
    e2 = [0 1 0]
    e3 = [0 0 1]

    Vector v = [ 3 -2  5]
    v = 3*e1 + -2*e2 + 5*e3
    Verification: [ 3 -2  5]

### Non-Standard Bases

Any set of linearly independent vectors that span the space can serve as a basis:

```python
# Alternative basis for R^2
b1 = np.array([1, 1])
b2 = np.array([1, -1])

# Check it's a valid basis
independent, rank = check_linear_independence([b1, b2])
print(f"b1 = {b1}, b2 = {b2}")
print(f"Linearly independent: {independent}")
print(f"Spans R^2: {rank == 2}\n")

# Express a vector in this basis
v = np.array([3, 1])
# v = c1*b1 + c2*b2
# Solve for coefficients
B = np.column_stack([b1, b2])
coeffs = np.linalg.solve(B, v)
print(f"Vector v = {v} in standard basis")
print(f"v = {coeffs[0]}*b1 + {coeffs[1]}*b2 in new basis")
print(f"Coefficients in new basis: {coeffs}")
```

    b1 = [1 1], b2 = [ 1 -1]
    Linearly independent: True
    Spans R^2: True

    Vector v = [3 1] in standard basis
    v = 2.0*b1 + 1.0*b2 in new basis
    Coefficients in new basis: [2. 1.]

## Subspaces

A **subspace** of a vector space $V$ is a subset $W \subseteq V$ that is itself a vector space under the same operations. To verify $W$ is a subspace:

1. The zero vector is in $W$
2. $W$ is closed under addition
3. $W$ is closed under scalar multiplication

### Column Space (Range)

The **column space** (or range) of a matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ is the span of its columns:

<p><div>
$
\text{Col}(\boldsymbol{A}) = \{\boldsymbol{A}\vec{x} : \vec{x} \in \mathbb{R}^n\}
$
</div></p>

It represents all possible outputs of the linear transformation defined by $\boldsymbol{A}$.

```python
# Find a basis for the column space
A = np.array([[1, 2, 3],
              [4, 5, 6],
              [7, 8, 9]])

print(f"Matrix A:\n{A}\n")
print(f"Rank of A: {np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)}")

# The rank tells us the dimension of the column space
# Use SVD to find an orthonormal basis for the column space
U, s, Vt = np.linalg.svd(A)

# The first r columns of U form an orthonormal basis for Col(A)
r = np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)
col_space_basis = U[:, :r]
print(f"\nOrthonormal basis for column space (first {r} columns of U):")
print(col_space_basis)
```

    Matrix A:
    [[1 2 3]
     [4 5 6]
     [7 8 9]]

    Rank of A: 2

    Orthonormal basis for column space (first 2 columns of U):
    [[-0.21483724  0.88723069]
     [-0.52058739  0.24964395]
     [-0.82633754 -0.38794278]]

### Null Space (Kernel)

The **null space** (or kernel) of a matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ is the set of all vectors that map to zero:

<p><div>
$
\text{Null}(\boldsymbol{A}) = \{\vec{x} : \boldsymbol{A}\vec{x} = \vec{0}\}
$
</div></p>

```python
from scipy.linalg import null_space

# Find the null space of A
null_A = null_space(A)
print(f"Null space of A (basis vectors):\n{null_A}\n")

# Verify: A @ null_vector should be approximately zero
if null_A.size > 0:
    result = A @ null_A
    print(f"A @ null_space_basis =\n{result}")
    print(f"All entries near zero: {np.allclose(result, 0)}")
```

    Null space of A (basis vectors):
    [[ 0.40824829]
     [-0.81649658]
     [ 0.40824829]]

    A @ null_space_basis =
    [[-4.44089210e-16]
     [-8.88178420e-16]
     [-1.33226763e-15]]
    All entries near zero: True

### The Fundamental Theorem of Linear Algebra

For an $m \times n$ matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ with rank $r$:

1. $\dim(\text{Col}(\boldsymbol{A})) = r$ (column space dimension)
2. $\dim(\text{Null}(\boldsymbol{A})) = n - r$ (null space dimension)
3. $\dim(\text{Row}(\boldsymbol{A})) = r$ (row space dimension)
4. $\dim(\text{Null}(\boldsymbol{A}^T)) = m - r$ (left null space dimension)

```python
def analyze_matrix_spaces(A):
    """Analyze the four fundamental subspaces of a matrix."""
    m, n = A.shape
    r = np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)

    print(f"Matrix dimensions: {m} x {n}")
    print(f"Rank: {r}\n")

    print("Fundamental Subspaces:")
    print(f"  Column space:    dimension = {r} (subspace of R^{m})")
    print(f"  Null space:      dimension = {n - r} (subspace of R^{n})")
    print(f"  Row space:       dimension = {r} (subspace of R^{n})")
    print(f"  Left null space: dimension = {m - r} (subspace of R^{m})")

# Example
B = np.array([[1, 2, 3, 4],
              [2, 4, 6, 8],
              [1, 1, 1, 1]])

print(f"Matrix B:\n{B}\n")
analyze_matrix_spaces(B)
```

    Matrix B:
    [[1 2 3 4]
     [2 4 6 8]
     [1 1 1 1]]

    Matrix dimensions: 3 x 4
    Rank: 2

    Fundamental Subspaces:
      Column space:    dimension = 2 (subspace of R^3)
      Null space:      dimension = 2 (subspace of R^4)
      Row space:       dimension = 2 (subspace of R^4)
      Left null space: dimension = 1 (subspace of R^3)

## Visualizing Subspaces in 3D

Let's visualize the column space and null space for a 3x3 rank-2 matrix:

```python
# Create a rank-2 matrix in R^3
C = np.array([[1, 2, 3],
              [4, 5, 6],
              [7, 8, 9]])

# Get column space basis
U, s, Vt = np.linalg.svd(C)
r = np.linalg.matrix_rank(C)
col_basis = U[:, :r]

# Get null space
null_basis = null_space(C)

fig = plt.figure(figsize=(12, 5))

# Plot column space (a plane through origin)
ax1 = fig.add_subplot(121, projection='3d')
t = np.linspace(-2, 2, 20)
T, S = np.meshgrid(t, t)
X = T * col_basis[0, 0] + S * col_basis[0, 1]
Y = T * col_basis[1, 0] + S * col_basis[1, 1]
Z = T * col_basis[2, 0] + S * col_basis[2, 1]
ax1.plot_surface(X, Y, Z, alpha=0.5, color='blue')
ax1.set_xlabel('X')
ax1.set_ylabel('Y')
ax1.set_zlabel('Z')
ax1.set_title(f'Column Space (dimension {r})')

# Plot null space (a line through origin)
ax2 = fig.add_subplot(122, projection='3d')
t = np.linspace(-2, 2, 100)
null_vec = null_basis.flatten()
ax2.plot(t * null_vec[0], t * null_vec[1], t * null_vec[2],
         'r-', linewidth=3, label='Null Space')
ax2.scatter([0], [0], [0], color='black', s=100)
ax2.set_xlabel('X')
ax2.set_ylabel('Y')
ax2.set_zlabel('Z')
ax2.set_title(f'Null Space (dimension {3-r})')
ax2.legend()

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Orthogonal Complements

Two subspaces are **orthogonal complements** if every vector in one is perpendicular to every vector in the other, and together they span the entire space.

- The null space is the orthogonal complement of the row space
- The left null space is the orthogonal complement of the column space

```python
# Verify orthogonality between row space and null space
row_space_basis = Vt[:r, :].T  # First r rows of Vt, transposed to columns
null_space_vector = null_basis.flatten()

# Dot product should be zero
for i in range(r):
    dot_product = np.dot(row_space_basis[:, i], null_space_vector)
    print(f"Row space basis vector {i+1} dot null space: {dot_product:.10f}")
```

    Row space basis vector 1 dot null space: -0.0000000000
    Row space basis vector 2 dot null space: 0.0000000000

## Summary

In this article, we covered:

- **Vector spaces**: Sets closed under addition and scalar multiplication
- **Linear independence**: Vectors with no redundant information
- **Span**: All possible linear combinations of vectors
- **Basis and dimension**: Minimal spanning sets
- **Subspaces**: Vector spaces within vector spaces
- **Column space**: The range of a matrix transformation
- **Null space**: Vectors that map to zero
- **Fundamental theorem**: The relationship between the four fundamental subspaces

Understanding these concepts is essential for eigenvalue analysis, which we'll explore in the next article.

## Resources

- [Vector Spaces - Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/linear-algebra/vectors-and-spaces)
- [Linear Algebra - Gilbert Strang (MIT)](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-06-linear-algebra-spring-2010/)
- [SciPy Linear Algebra](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/linalg.html)

Commit message:

Add missing span and subspace visualizations to "Linear Algebra: Vector Spaces" post

content/post/2019-05-25-linear-algebra-05-vector-spaces.md, after:

---
draft: false
layout: post
title: "Linear Algebra: Vector Spaces and Subspaces"
subtitle: "Linear Algebra Crash Course for Programmers Part 5"
date: 2019-05-25
author: "Craig Johnston"
URL: "linear-algebra-vector-spaces/"
image: "/img/post/matrix.jpg"
twitter_image:  "/img/post/matrix_876_438.jpg"
tags:
- Linear Algebra
- Matrices
- Math
- Python
- Data Science
series:
- Linear Algebra Crash Course
---

This article on **vector spaces and subspaces** is part five of an ongoing crash course on programming with linear algebra, demonstrating concepts and implementations in Python. Vector spaces provide the theoretical framework for understanding linear algebra, while subspaces help us analyze the structure of matrices and linear transformations.

<!--more-->

This series began with [Linear Algebra: Vectors](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-vectors/) and has covered [Matrices](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-matrices/), [Systems of Equations](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-systems-equations/), and [Inverses and Determinants](https://imti.co/linear-algebra-inverse-determinant/).

> Python examples in this article make use of the [Numpy] library and [SciPy] for advanced linear algebra operations.

[numpy]: https://imti.co/python-data-essentials-numpy/
[SciPy]: https://scipy.org/

```python
import numpy as np
from scipy import linalg
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from mpl_toolkits.mplot3d import Axes3D

%matplotlib inline
```
{{< math >}}
{{< toc >}}
{{< content-ad >}}

## What is a Vector Space?

A **vector space** (or linear space) is a collection of vectors that can be added together and multiplied by scalars while staying within the collection. Formally, a vector space $V$ over a field $F$ (typically $\mathbb{R}$) must satisfy:

**Closure properties:**
- Addition: If $\vec{u}, \vec{v} \in V$, then $\vec{u} + \vec{v} \in V$
- Scalar multiplication: If $\vec{v} \in V$ and $c \in F$, then $c\vec{v} \in V$

**Additional axioms:**
- Associativity, commutativity of addition
- Existence of zero vector and additive inverses
- Distributivity of scalar multiplication

The most common example is $\mathbb{R}^n$, the space of all $n$-dimensional real vectors.

```python
# R^3: The space of all 3-dimensional vectors
# Any linear combination of vectors in R^3 stays in R^3

u = np.array([1, 2, 3])
v = np.array([4, 5, 6])
c = 2.5

# Closure under addition
w = u + v
print(f"u + v = {w}  (still in R^3)")

# Closure under scalar multiplication
scaled = c * u
print(f"{c} * u = {scaled}  (still in R^3)")
```

    u + v = [5 7 9]  (still in R^3)
    2.5 * u = [2.5 5.  7.5]  (still in R^3)

## Linear Independence

A set of vectors $\{\vec{v}_1, \vec{v}_2, \ldots, \vec{v}_k\}$ is **linearly independent** if the only solution to:

<p><div>
$
c_1\vec{v}_1 + c_2\vec{v}_2 + \cdots + c_k\vec{v}_k = \vec{0}
$
</div></p>

is $c_1 = c_2 = \cdots = c_k = 0$.

If there exist non-zero coefficients that satisfy this equation, the vectors are **linearly dependent**.

```python
def check_linear_independence(vectors):
    """Check if a set of vectors is linearly independent."""
    # Stack vectors as columns of a matrix
    A = np.column_stack(vectors)
    rank = np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)
    num_vectors = len(vectors)

    is_independent = (rank == num_vectors)
    return is_independent, rank

# Example 1: Linearly independent vectors
v1 = np.array([1, 0, 0])
v2 = np.array([0, 1, 0])
v3 = np.array([0, 0, 1])

independent, rank = check_linear_independence([v1, v2, v3])
print(f"Vectors: {v1}, {v2}, {v3}")
print(f"Linearly independent: {independent}, Rank: {rank}\n")
```

    Vectors: [1 0 0], [0 1 0], [0 0 1]
    Linearly independent: True, Rank: 3

```python
# Example 2: Linearly dependent vectors
w1 = np.array([1, 2, 3])
w2 = np.array([2, 4, 6])  # w2 = 2 * w1
w3 = np.array([1, 1, 1])

independent, rank = check_linear_independence([w1, w2, w3])
print(f"Vectors: {w1}, {w2}, {w3}")
print(f"Linearly independent: {independent}, Rank: {rank}")
print(f"Note: w2 = 2 * w1, so they are dependent")
```

    Vectors: [1 2 3], [2 4 6], [1 1 1]
    Linearly independent: False, Rank: 2
    Note: w2 = 2 * w1, so they are dependent

## Span

The **span** of a set of vectors is the set of all possible linear combinations of those vectors:

<p><div>
$
\text{span}(\vec{v}_1, \vec{v}_2, \ldots, \vec{v}_k) = \{c_1\vec{v}_1 + c_2\vec{v}_2 + \cdots + c_k\vec{v}_k : c_i \in \mathbb{R}\}
$
</div></p>

```python
# Visualize the span of two vectors in R^2
def plot_span_2d(v1, v2, ax, title):
    """Visualize the span of two 2D vectors."""
    # Generate random linear combinations
    t = np.linspace(-2, 2, 50)
    s = np.linspace(-2, 2, 50)
    T, S = np.meshgrid(t, s)

    # Points in the span
    X = T * v1[0] + S * v2[0]
    Y = T * v1[1] + S * v2[1]

    ax.scatter(X.flatten(), Y.flatten(), alpha=0.3, s=1, c='blue')
    ax.quiver(0, 0, v1[0], v1[1], angles='xy', scale_units='xy', scale=1,
              color='red', width=0.02, label=f'v1 = {v1}')
    ax.quiver(0, 0, v2[0], v2[1], angles='xy', scale_units='xy', scale=1,
              color='green', width=0.02, label=f'v2 = {v2}')
    ax.set_xlim(-5, 5)
    ax.set_ylim(-5, 5)
    ax.set_aspect('equal')
    ax.grid(True, alpha=0.3)
    ax.legend()
    ax.set_title(title)

fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(12, 5))

# Two independent vectors span R^2
plot_span_2d(np.array([1, 0]), np.array([0, 1]), axes[0],
             'Independent vectors: Span is all of R^2')

# Two dependent vectors span a line
plot_span_2d(np.array([1, 2]), np.array([2, 4]), axes[1],
             'Dependent vectors: Span is a line')

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

![Span Visualization: Independent vs Dependent Vectors](/img/post/linear-algebra/span-visualization.png)

## Basis

A **basis** for a vector space $V$ is a set of vectors that:
1. Are linearly independent
2. Span $V$

The **dimension** of a vector space is the number of vectors in any basis.

```python
# Standard basis for R^3
e1 = np.array([1, 0, 0])
e2 = np.array([0, 1, 0])
e3 = np.array([0, 0, 1])

print("Standard basis for R^3:")
print(f"e1 = {e1}")
print(f"e2 = {e2}")
print(f"e3 = {e3}")

# Any vector in R^3 can be written as a linear combination
v = np.array([3, -2, 5])
print(f"\nVector v = {v}")
print(f"v = {v[0]}*e1 + {v[1]}*e2 + {v[2]}*e3")
print(f"Verification: {v[0]*e1 + v[1]*e2 + v[2]*e3}")
```

    Standard basis for R^3:
    e1 = [1 0 0]
    e2 = [0 1 0]
    e3 = [0 0 1]

    Vector v = [ 3 -2  5]
    v = 3*e1 + -2*e2 + 5*e3
    Verification: [ 3 -2  5]

### Non-Standard Bases

Any set of linearly independent vectors that span the space can serve as a basis:

```python
# Alternative basis for R^2
b1 = np.array([1, 1])
b2 = np.array([1, -1])

# Check it's a valid basis
independent, rank = check_linear_independence([b1, b2])
print(f"b1 = {b1}, b2 = {b2}")
print(f"Linearly independent: {independent}")
print(f"Spans R^2: {rank == 2}\n")

# Express a vector in this basis
v = np.array([3, 1])
# v = c1*b1 + c2*b2
# Solve for coefficients
B = np.column_stack([b1, b2])
coeffs = np.linalg.solve(B, v)
print(f"Vector v = {v} in standard basis")
print(f"v = {coeffs[0]}*b1 + {coeffs[1]}*b2 in new basis")
print(f"Coefficients in new basis: {coeffs}")
```

    b1 = [1 1], b2 = [ 1 -1]
    Linearly independent: True
    Spans R^2: True

    Vector v = [3 1] in standard basis
    v = 2.0*b1 + 1.0*b2 in new basis
    Coefficients in new basis: [2. 1.]

## Subspaces

A **subspace** of a vector space $V$ is a subset $W \subseteq V$ that is itself a vector space under the same operations. To verify $W$ is a subspace:

1. The zero vector is in $W$
2. $W$ is closed under addition
3. $W$ is closed under scalar multiplication

### Column Space (Range)

The **column space** (or range) of a matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ is the span of its columns:

<p><div>
$
\text{Col}(\boldsymbol{A}) = \{\boldsymbol{A}\vec{x} : \vec{x} \in \mathbb{R}^n\}
$
</div></p>

It represents all possible outputs of the linear transformation defined by $\boldsymbol{A}$.

```python
# Find a basis for the column space
A = np.array([[1, 2, 3],
              [4, 5, 6],
              [7, 8, 9]])

print(f"Matrix A:\n{A}\n")
print(f"Rank of A: {np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)}")

# The rank tells us the dimension of the column space
# Use SVD to find an orthonormal basis for the column space
U, s, Vt = np.linalg.svd(A)

# The first r columns of U form an orthonormal basis for Col(A)
r = np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)
col_space_basis = U[:, :r]
print(f"\nOrthonormal basis for column space (first {r} columns of U):")
print(col_space_basis)
```

    Matrix A:
    [[1 2 3]
     [4 5 6]
     [7 8 9]]

    Rank of A: 2

    Orthonormal basis for column space (first 2 columns of U):
    [[-0.21483724  0.88723069]
     [-0.52058739  0.24964395]
     [-0.82633754 -0.38794278]]

### Null Space (Kernel)

The **null space** (or kernel) of a matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ is the set of all vectors that map to zero:

<p><div>
$
\text{Null}(\boldsymbol{A}) = \{\vec{x} : \boldsymbol{A}\vec{x} = \vec{0}\}
$
</div></p>

```python
from scipy.linalg import null_space

# Find the null space of A
null_A = null_space(A)
print(f"Null space of A (basis vectors):\n{null_A}\n")

# Verify: A @ null_vector should be approximately zero
if null_A.size > 0:
    result = A @ null_A
    print(f"A @ null_space_basis =\n{result}")
    print(f"All entries near zero: {np.allclose(result, 0)}")
```

    Null space of A (basis vectors):
    [[ 0.40824829]
     [-0.81649658]
     [ 0.40824829]]

    A @ null_space_basis =
    [[-4.44089210e-16]
     [-8.88178420e-16]
     [-1.33226763e-15]]
    All entries near zero: True

### The Fundamental Theorem of Linear Algebra

For an $m \times n$ matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ with rank $r$:

1. $\dim(\text{Col}(\boldsymbol{A})) = r$ (column space dimension)
2. $\dim(\text{Null}(\boldsymbol{A})) = n - r$ (null space dimension)
3. $\dim(\text{Row}(\boldsymbol{A})) = r$ (row space dimension)
4. $\dim(\text{Null}(\boldsymbol{A}^T)) = m - r$ (left null space dimension)

```python
def analyze_matrix_spaces(A):
    """Analyze the four fundamental subspaces of a matrix."""
    m, n = A.shape
    r = np.linalg.matrix_rank(A)

    print(f"Matrix dimensions: {m} x {n}")
    print(f"Rank: {r}\n")

    print("Fundamental Subspaces:")
    print(f"  Column space:    dimension = {r} (subspace of R^{m})")
    print(f"  Null space:      dimension = {n - r} (subspace of R^{n})")
    print(f"  Row space:       dimension = {r} (subspace of R^{n})")
    print(f"  Left null space: dimension = {m - r} (subspace of R^{m})")

# Example
B = np.array([[1, 2, 3, 4],
              [2, 4, 6, 8],
              [1, 1, 1, 1]])

print(f"Matrix B:\n{B}\n")
analyze_matrix_spaces(B)
```

    Matrix B:
    [[1 2 3 4]
     [2 4 6 8]
     [1 1 1 1]]

    Matrix dimensions: 3 x 4
    Rank: 2

    Fundamental Subspaces:
      Column space:    dimension = 2 (subspace of R^3)
      Null space:      dimension = 2 (subspace of R^4)
      Row space:       dimension = 2 (subspace of R^4)
      Left null space: dimension = 1 (subspace of R^3)

## Visualizing Subspaces in 3D

Let's visualize the column space and null space for a 3x3 rank-2 matrix:

```python
# Create a rank-2 matrix in R^3
C = np.array([[1, 2, 3],
              [4, 5, 6],
              [7, 8, 9]])

# Get column space basis
U, s, Vt = np.linalg.svd(C)
r = np.linalg.matrix_rank(C)
col_basis = U[:, :r]

# Get null space
null_basis = null_space(C)

fig = plt.figure(figsize=(12, 5))

# Plot column space (a plane through origin)
ax1 = fig.add_subplot(121, projection='3d')
t = np.linspace(-2, 2, 20)
T, S = np.meshgrid(t, t)
X = T * col_basis[0, 0] + S * col_basis[0, 1]
Y = T * col_basis[1, 0] + S * col_basis[1, 1]
Z = T * col_basis[2, 0] + S * col_basis[2, 1]
ax1.plot_surface(X, Y, Z, alpha=0.5, color='blue')
ax1.set_xlabel('X')
ax1.set_ylabel('Y')
ax1.set_zlabel('Z')
ax1.set_title(f'Column Space (dimension {r})')

# Plot null space (a line through origin)
ax2 = fig.add_subplot(122, projection='3d')
t = np.linspace(-2, 2, 100)
null_vec = null_basis.flatten()
ax2.plot(t * null_vec[0], t * null_vec[1], t * null_vec[2],
         'r-', linewidth=3, label='Null Space')
ax2.scatter([0], [0], [0], color='black', s=100)
ax2.set_xlabel('X')
ax2.set_ylabel('Y')
ax2.set_zlabel('Z')
ax2.set_title(f'Null Space (dimension {3-r})')
ax2.legend()

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

![Column Space and Null Space in 3D](/img/post/linear-algebra/subspaces-3d.png)

## Orthogonal Complements

Two subspaces are **orthogonal complements** if every vector in one is perpendicular to every vector in the other, and together they span the entire space.

- The null space is the orthogonal complement of the row space
- The left null space is the orthogonal complement of the column space

```python
# Verify orthogonality between row space and null space
row_space_basis = Vt[:r, :].T  # First r rows of Vt, transposed to columns
null_space_vector = null_basis.flatten()

# Dot product should be zero
for i in range(r):
    dot_product = np.dot(row_space_basis[:, i], null_space_vector)
    print(f"Row space basis vector {i+1} dot null space: {dot_product:.10f}")
```

    Row space basis vector 1 dot null space: -0.0000000000
    Row space basis vector 2 dot null space: 0.0000000000

## Summary

In this article, we covered:

- **Vector spaces**: Sets closed under addition and scalar multiplication
- **Linear independence**: Vectors with no redundant information
- **Span**: All possible linear combinations of vectors
- **Basis and dimension**: Minimal spanning sets
- **Subspaces**: Vector spaces within vector spaces
- **Column space**: The range of a matrix transformation
- **Null space**: Vectors that map to zero
- **Fundamental theorem**: The relationship between the four fundamental subspaces

Understanding these concepts is essential for eigenvalue analysis, which we'll explore in the next article.

## Resources

- [Vector Spaces - Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/linear-algebra/vectors-and-spaces)
- [Linear Algebra - Gilbert Strang (MIT)](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-06-linear-algebra-spring-2010/)
- [SciPy Linear Algebra](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/linalg.html)
